.TH CISV 1 "March 2026" "cisv-cli 0.4.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cisv \- high-performance CSV parser and writer CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cisv
[\fBCOMMAND\fR] [\fBOPTIONS\fR] [\fBFILE\fR]
.br
.B cisv
\fBwrite\fR [\fBOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBcisv\fR is a high-performance CSV command-line tool backed by \fBcisv-core\fR.
It supports parsing, row counting, column selection, head/tail output, benchmarking,
and CSV generation through the \fBwrite\fR subcommand.
.SH INPUT MODEL
.TP
.B File path
Default input mode. Provide a CSV file path as the last argument.
.TP
.B "-"
Use \fB-\fR to read CSV from stdin explicitly.
.TP
.B Piped stdin
If stdin is piped and no input file is provided, \fBcisv\fR reads stdin automatically.
.SH OUTPUT MODEL
.TP
.B CSV (default)
Rows are written as CSV to stdout (or \fB--output\fR file).
.TP
.B JSON (\fB--json\fR)
Outputs a JSON array. Header row is used as object keys unless \fB--no-header\fR.
.TP
.B JSONL (\fB--jsonl\fR)
Outputs one JSON object/array per line for streaming pipelines.
.SH COMMANDS
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B parse
Parse a CSV file (default command when no command is provided).
.TP
.B write
Generate CSV output and benchmark writer throughput.
.SH PARSE OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Show version.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-delimiter \fIDELIM\fR
Set field delimiter (default: \fB,\fR).
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quote \fICHAR\fR
Set quote character (default: \fB"\fR).
.TP
.B \-e, \-\-escape \fICHAR\fR
Set escape character.
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-comment \fICHAR\fR
Set comment character.
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-trim
Trim whitespace from fields.
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-relaxed
Enable relaxed parsing.
.TP
.B \-\-skip-empty
Skip empty lines.
.TP
.B \-\-skip-errors
Skip lines with parse errors.
.TP
.B \-\-strict
Stop on first parse error (default behavior).
.TP
.B \-\-no-header
Skip first row in output.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress non-data stderr logs.
.TP
.B \-\-max-row \fISIZE\fR
Set max row size in bytes.
.TP
.B \-\-from-line \fIN\fR
Start from line \fIN\fR (1-based).
.TP
.B \-\-to-line \fIN\fR
Stop at line \fIN\fR.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-select \fICOLS\fR
Select comma-separated column indices.
.TP
.B \-\-select-name \fINAMES\fR
Select comma-separated column names from the header row.
.TP
.B \-\-where \fIEXPR\fR
Filter rows with expressions like \fBcol==value\fR, \fBcol>100\fR, or \fBcol~text\fR.
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-count
Print row count only.
.TP
.B \-\-head \fIN\fR
Print first \fIN\fR rows.
.TP
.B \-\-tail \fIN\fR
Print last \fIN\fR rows.
.TP
.B \-o, \-\-output \fIFILE\fR
Write output to file instead of stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output JSON array format.
.TP
.B \-\-jsonl
Output JSON Lines format.
.TP
.B \-\-parallel
Use multi-threaded parsing.
.TP
.B \-\-threads \fIN\fR
Set worker thread count for parallel mode. Also enables \fB--parallel\fR.
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-benchmark
Run parser benchmark mode.
.SH WHERE EXPRESSIONS
.TP
.B Equality / inequality
\fBcol==value\fR, \fBcol!=value\fR
.TP
.B Numeric comparison
\fBcol>100\fR, \fBcol>=100\fR, \fBcol<100\fR, \fBcol<=100\fR
.TP
.B Contains
\fBcol~text\fR
.TP
.B Column reference
\fBcol\fR can be a zero-based index (\fB0\fR, \fB1\fR, ...) or a header name
when a header row is present.
.SH WRITE OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-g, \-\-generate \fIN\fR
Generate \fIN\fR rows of synthetic CSV data.
.TP
.B \-o, \-\-output \fIFILE\fR
Write output to file.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-delimiter \fICHAR\fR
Set output delimiter.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quote \fICHAR\fR
Set output quote character.
.TP
.B \-Q, \-\-always-quote
Always quote output fields.
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-crlf
Use CRLF line endings.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-null \fISTRING\fR
Text to output for NULL fields.
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-columns \fILIST\fR
Column names for generation mode.
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-benchmark
Run writer benchmark mode.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Parse and print:
.B cisv data.csv
.TP
Count rows only:
.B cisv \-c data.csv
.TP
Select columns 0 and 2:
.B cisv \-s 0,2 data.csv
.TP
Parse stdin stream:
.B cat data.csv | cisv -
.TP
Parse TSV and emit JSONL:
.B cisv -d $'\\t' --jsonl data.tsv
.TP
Select by header name:
.B cisv --select-name id,name data.csv
.TP
Filter rows:
.B cisv --where 'status==ok' data.csv
.TP
Parse with four worker threads:
.B cisv --parallel --threads 4 data.csv
.TP
Filter by numeric threshold:
.B cisv --where 'latency_ms>100' data.csv
.TP
Filter substring match:
.B cisv --where 'email~@example.com' data.csv
.TP
JSON output:
.B cisv --json data.csv
.TP
Pipeline from stdin to file:
.B cat data.csv | cisv --select-name id,name - > reduced.csv
.TP
Generate one million rows:
.B cisv write \-g 1000000 \-o out.csv
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CISV_STATS
If set, print parser statistics to stderr after execution.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /usr/bin/cisv
CLI binary.
.TP
.B /usr/share/man/man1/cisv.1
Manual page.
.SH NOTES
.TP
For best performance on very large files, avoid unnecessary format conversion
and prefer direct CSV output unless JSON/JSONL is required by downstream tools.
.TP
Use \fB--no-header\fR when processing CSV sources without header rows.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failure.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR awk (1),
.BR cut (1),
.BR sed (1)
.SH HOMEPAGE
https://github.com/Sanix-Darker/cisv-cli
